Chapter One. The Letter. The house was larger than the
photographs had suggested, and quieter. Margot stood at the end
of the gravel drive with her suitcase and her messenger
bag and looked at it the way you look at
a sentence in a foreign language — recognizing the shape
without understanding the meaning. Three stories of pale limestone and
dark timber. A slate roof gone silver with age. Windows
that caught the late October light and held it, so
the house seemed to glow faintly from within, though she
knew no one was inside. Or she believed no one
was inside. The letter had said she would be the
first to arrive. She had read the letter eleven times.
She had it memorized the way some people memorize prayers
— not by intention but by repetition, the words wearing
a groove in her until they were less something she
knew than something she carried. You have been selected. Selected
by whom, for what, on what criteria — the letter
did not say. It named the place, the date, the
duration. One year. It named a stipend that was modest
but sufficient. It named nothing else. Margot had spent four
days researching Eleanora Voss before accepting. She found an obituary
in a regional newspaper — brief, factual, devoid of color.
A mention in the archives of a conservation trust. A
single photograph, badly scanned, of a woman in her seventies
standing beside what appeared to be this house, though the
angle was different and the trees were smaller. The woman
was not smiling. She was looking at the camera with
her chin slightly raised, as if she had just been
asked something and was deciding whether to answer. Nothing else.
No social media, no interviews, no foundation website, no press
releases. Eleanora Voss had lived and died and left behind
a house, a trust, and a set of instructions no
one could quite explain. Margot picked up her suitcase and
walked toward the front door. ... The door was unlocked.
This bothered her for reasons she could not have articulated
— something about the vulnerability of it, the openness. She
had spent seven years working in a building where every
door required a badge, where access was tiered and tracked,
where the architecture itself was an argument about who belonged
where. Inside, the hallway was wide and cool and smelled
of beeswax and old stone. The floors were dark oak,
scuffed but cared for. To her left, a doorway opened
into what appeared to be a library. To her right,
a staircase curved upward, its banister worn smooth by decades
of hands. Straight ahead, at the end of the hall,
a second set of doors stood open to reveal a
kitchen — and beyond it, through tall windows, the green
slope of a lawn descending toward trees. She set her
suitcase down and stood in the quiet. She could hear
the house: the faint tick of wood expanding in the
afternoon warmth, the hum of something mechanical in a distant
room, the wind pressing against the windows on the west
side. These were the sounds of an empty building, and
she had spent enough evenings in her own apartment to
recognize them — the particular quality of silence that exists
when a space built for people contains only one. Her
phone buzzed in her pocket. She took it out, looked
at the notification — a calendar reminder she had set
three months ago, when accepting the residency still felt theoretical:
Arrive at The Keeping House — and put the phone
away. She had told no one about the reminder. She
had told very few people about the residency at all.
Her mother knew, and her former supervisor, and her therapist,
who had said, with the careful neutrality of someone trained
not to project, "That sounds like it could be really
interesting." Margot had wanted her to say more. She had
wanted someone to tell her she was making either a
courageous decision or a terrible mistake, because either would have
been clarifying. Instead, she had been met with the polite,
supportive vagueness she had come to expect from everyone, and
she had gotten in her car and driven six hours
to this house. ... She explored the ground floor the
way she explored everything: methodically, noting details, constructing a mental
map. The library took up most of the east wing
— floor-to-ceiling shelves of dark wood, a rolling ladder, two
leather armchairs positioned near a window, a reading table with
a green-shaded lamp. The books were eclectic and well-used: novels,
histories, field guides, volumes of poetry, several shelves of philosophy,
a surprising number of cookbooks. She pulled out a copy
of Wendell Berry's essays and found the margins annotated in
a small, precise hand. The same hand, she noticed, had
annotated a novel by Penelope Fitzgerald three shelves away, and
a guide to the native grasses of the central plains
on the shelf above. Eleanora's handwriting. It had to be.
Margot felt the small electric jolt of connection — the
same feeling she got when a pattern emerged from data,
when the noise resolved into signal. She almost took out
her notebook. Instead, she put the book back and made
herself keep walking. The kitchen was large and well-equipped, with
a long wooden counter and a range that looked industrial.
Copper pots hung from a rack above the island. The
pantry was stocked — flour, rice, olive oil, canned tomatoes,
dried beans, spices in glass jars with hand-written labels. Someone
had prepared for the residents' arrival. The handwriting on the
spice jars was different from the annotations in the books
— rounder, less precise. The caretaker, presumably. The dining room
held a single long table made of a wood Margot
didn't recognize — something pale and heavily grained, sanded smooth.
It was set for six, though only one place had
a glass of water. She touched the glass. The water
was cool but not cold. Someone had poured it recently.
"You found it, then." Margot turned. A woman stood in
the doorway that connected the kitchen to the dining room
— lean, gray-haired, wearing work boots and a canvas jacket.
She had the kind of face that was hard to
age: deeply lined around the eyes but clear-skinned, alert. She
was holding a pair of garden shears. "I'm June," the
woman said. "I look after the place." "Margot. Margot Ainsley."
June nodded as though this confirmed something she already knew.
"Your cottage is the third one on the left, past
the birch stand. I put fresh sheets on this morning.
The woodstove draws well but give it a minute on
the damper before you open it all the way." "Thank
you." "Dinner's at seven. I won't be cooking — that'll
be up to all of you — but I stocked
the pantry and there's a garden out back with the
last of the chard and some late tomatoes." She paused,
considering Margot with an appraising directness that felt neither hostile
nor warm. "You're early. The letter said the twenty-eighth." "It's
the twenty-seventh," Margot said, then added, as if it required
explanation: "I like to arrive before things begin." June made
a sound that might have been a laugh. "Well. You've
got the whole place to yourself tonight. The others start
arriving tomorrow." She turned to go, then stopped. "If you
walk the property, stay on the marked trails until you
know the bluff. The path to the river is steeper
than it looks, and the footing's bad after rain." "Has
it rained?" "It always rains here in October." ... Margot's
cottage was a single room with a sleeping loft, accessible
by a steep wooden ladder. The main floor held a
desk built into the wall below the window, a woodstove,
a bookshelf — empty, waiting — and a chair upholstered
in faded green. The window above the desk faced east,
into a stand of birch trees whose leaves had turned
the color of old paper. The light through them was
yellow and dappled and moved constantly, so the desk seemed
to float in a shifting field of shadow and gold.
She unpacked with the efficiency of someone who had rehearsed.
Notebooks on the desk — the Leuchtturm for daily observations,
the Moleskine for project notes, the small Field Notes for
things she noticed on walks. Pens in the leather case
her brother had given her when she left her job.
Clothes in the wardrobe: three pairs of pants, five shirts,
two sweaters, a rain jacket. Running shoes. Her laptop she
placed in the desk drawer, face down, as though putting
it to sleep. Then she sat in the green chair
and looked at the trees through the window and tried
to feel what she was supposed to feel. The birch
leaves moved. The light shifted. She registered both. This was
the problem. She could describe what she felt with great
precision — could locate the tightness in her chest, the
heaviness behind her eyes, the restless energy in her legs.
She could name the feelings, track their frequency, correlate them
with triggers. She had, in fact, done exactly this: a
spreadsheet, updated weekly, mapping her emotional states against sleep, exercise,
caffeine, social interaction, and weather. She had mentioned this to
her therapist once, near the end. "I think I've gotten
very good at monitoring my inner life," she said, "and
I'm not sure that's the same as having one." Her
therapist had been quiet for a long time. Then she'd
said, "What would it look like to stop monitoring?" Margot
hadn't known. She still didn't know. But she had come
here. ... She walked the property before dinner, keeping to
the marked trails as June had instructed. The land was
larger than she'd expected — the forest began thirty yards
behind the cottages and thickened quickly, hardwoods giving way to
a denser mix of cedar and oak, the canopy closing
overhead until the sky was visible only in patches. The
trail climbed gradually, switching back through limestone outcroppings furred with
moss, until it reached a clearing at the top of
the hill. The clearing held a single bench — rough-hewn,
weathered, bolted to a flat slab of rock. From it,
the view opened suddenly and completely: the river valley below,
the water catching the last of the afternoon light, the
hills on the far side layered in shades of rust
and amber and the deep green of cedars that hadn't
turned. The sky was high and pale and enormous. Margot
sat down. The bench was cold through her jeans. The
wind at this height was steady and carried the smell
of fallen leaves and something mineral — the limestone, the
river, the particular scent of autumn in country she didn't
know. She reached for her notebook. Stopped. Put her hand
back in her lap. The valley was quiet except for
the wind and, far below, the sound of the river
— not the rush of rapids but a lower, steadier
sound, like breath. A bird she couldn't identify called from
the tree line and was not answered. The light was
changing, the shadows of the western hills beginning their long
reach across the valley floor. She sat there for a
long time. She did not take notes. She did not
check the time. She did not think about the other
residents who would arrive tomorrow, or the project she had
proposed, or the job she had left, or the careful
life she had disassembled in order to be here. She
sat and she watched the light move across the valley
and she let the cold come into her hands and
her face and she did not name what she felt
because for once — for a few minutes, in a
place she did not know, on a bench someone else
had placed at the exact right spot on the hill
— she did not need to. ... She cooked for
herself that night in the enormous kitchen. Pasta with garlic
and the last of the cherry tomatoes from the garden,
which she found in a basket on the counter with
a note in June's round handwriting: These won't last. Use
them tonight. She ate at the long table, in the
chair nearest the window, with a glass of water and
a view of the darkening lawn. The house settled around
her — those small sounds again, the contractions and expansions
of old wood, the tick of the radiator in the
hall, the wind finding new angles against the glass. She
washed her plate and her pot and the cutting board
and dried them and put them away. She wiped down
the counter. She turned off the kitchen light and stood
in the dining room in the dark. Six place settings.
One used. Tomorrow there would be more. She walked back
to her cottage along the gravel path, the stars overhead
sharp and numerous in a way she hadn't seen in
years — the specific extravagance of a sky without light
pollution. Her cottage was dark. She lit the woodstove, remembering
June's instruction about the damper, and sat at her desk
while the room slowly warmed. She opened the Leuchtturm to
the first blank page. For a long time she held
her pen above the paper, not writing, feeling the faint
heat from the stove reach her ankles and then her
knees. The birch trees outside the window were invisible now,
swallowed by the dark, but she could hear them —
the papery rustle of leaves that hadn't fallen yet. She
wrote the date. October twenty-seventh. Below it, after another pause,
she wrote: I am here. I don't know what that
means yet. She closed the notebook and went to bed.
Outside, in the dark, the wind moved through the valley,
and the house held its shape against it, as it
had for a hundred years, as it would — she
was beginning to understand — for a long time after
she was gone. Sometime in the night, she woke to
a sound she couldn't place. It took her a moment
to identify it: gravel, under tires. A car, coming slowly
up the drive. Headlights swept across the ceiling of her
loft, two long arms of light reaching and retreating. Someone
else was arriving early. She lay still and listened to
the engine cut, the car door open and close, footsteps
on the gravel — heavy, deliberate, the footsteps of someone
carrying something. Then the front door of the main house,
its hinges audible even from here. She pulled the blanket
to her chin and stared at the ceiling and did
not get up and did not look. The house took
its new guest in, as it had taken her, and
the night continued.